# Brave new green algorithm

Papers that use Brave New Algorithm for different purposes, mainly
measuring energy expenses; it uses code at
[BraveNewAlgorithm.jl](https://github.com/CeciMerelo/BraveNewAlgorithm.jl) and
is hosted at [a GitHub
repository](https://github.com/JJ/brave-new-green-algorithm).

## Description

The Brave New Algorithm is an evolutionary algorithm that constraints
reproduction according to a system of *castes* inspired in the Brave New World
novel by Aldous Huxley. That way it can control more effectively the
exploration-exploitation balance. It is fully described in [this
paper](https://link.springer.com/chapter/10.1007/978-3-031-08266-5_20) 

## Source for papers

These are the sources of the papers accepted so far

### OLA'26 conference

Citation:

> JJ Merelo, Cecilia Merelo Molina **Best practices in measuring energy
> consumption in population-based metaheuristics**, in Proceedings OLA'26
> International Conference on Optimization and Learning, pp 183-194, available
> online: https://vb.svako.lt/object/elaba:291738676/291738676.pdf#page=188.

Check out the source code at [`ola-26.Rnw`](ola-26.Rnw). This was created for the [OLA 26
  conference](https://ola2026.sciencesconf.org/) in Chania,
  Crete.

- [`ola-26.R`](ola-26.R) contains just the code used to generate tables
  and graphs.
- Check out [the presentation](preso/index.html).

- Additional content has been created:
  [`ola-26-explainer.Rmd`](ola-26-explainer.Rmd) is a summary of the main
  findings.
  [Read it online here](ola-26-explainer.html), or render it locally with
  `rmarkdown::render("ola-26-explainer.Rmd")` after cloning the repository.

- An explanation of how operational context influences the workload measurements
  is shown in [this file](ola-26-extended.html), generated by [this markdown
  file](ola-26-extended.Rmd).

- The paper is [published in the OLA'26
  proceedings](https://vb.svako.lt/object/elaba:291738676/291738676.pdf#page=188),
  but there's also [an anotated
  version](https://github.com/JJ/brave-new-green-algorithm/releases/download/v1.0OLA/OLA-26-annotated.pdf)
  that can help you navigate through the main findings and how data is
  processed.

### LION'26 conference

Content for this paper is included in [this
release](https://github.com/JJ/brave-new-green-algorithm/releases/tag/v1.0LION).

- Paper source: [`lion-26.Rnw`](lion-26.Rnw) with extracted R code in
  [`lion-26.R`](lion-26.R).
- A [short summary of the main findings in the paper](lion-26-explainer.html).
    - You can render locally with `rmarkdown::render("lion-26-explainer.Rmd")`
      if everything is installed properly.
- [An annotated version of the
  paper](https://github.com/JJ/brave-new-green-algorithm/releases/download/v1.0LION/lion-26-annotated.pdf)
  with the main findings and other highlights is included in the release.

- A [critical examination of the experimental data](lion-26-extended.html) by
  modeling energy consumption in terms of the algorithm parameters.

### Cross-paper research progression

A companion document traces the research arc from LION-26 to OLA-26: what the first
paper found, which conclusions the second paper revised, and why (with live R plots
built from both datasets):

- [From LION to OLA: How Our Understanding of BNA Energy Evolved](lion-ola-progression.html)
    - Render locally with `rmarkdown::render("lion-ola-progression.Rmd")`
      after cloning the repository.

### CEC'26 conference

- In this paper we started to repeat the experiments multiple times looking for
  statistical significance of the dependence on the algorithm parameters,
  mainly. [This simulation](bonus/cec-energy-model.html), that uses the actual
  model parameters, show how energy consumption varies with time, and how it is
  modulated by problem size (dimension) and algorithm parameters (population
  size and max number of generations to stop).
- There's an [abridged and enhanced](cec-2026-explainer.html) version of the paper which includes a different view at experimental data and how we can explain variability in operating conditions.

## Bibliography

Please reference [one of these papers](references.bib) when re-using the content of this
repository, code or data

```bibtex
@misc{bna25,
year = {2025},
month = {11},
url = {https://hdl.handle.net/10481/107864},
abstract = {Green computing tries to push a series of best practices that, in general, reduce the amount of energy consumed to perform a given piece of work. There are no fixed rules for {\em greening} an algorithm implementation, which means that we need to create a methodology that, after profiling the energy spent by an algorithm implementation, comes up with specific rules that will optimize the amount of energy spent. In population based algorithms, the exploration/exploitation balance is one of the most critical aspects. The algorithm we will be working with in this paper called Brave New Algorithm was designed with the main objective of keeping that balance in an optimal way through the stratification of the population. In this paper we will analyze how this balance affects the energy consumption of the algorithm.},
organization = {Ministerio español de Economía y Competitividad: proyecto PID2023-147409NB-C21.},
keywords = {Green Computing},
keywords = {Energy profiling},
keywords = {Metaheuristics},
title = {Analyzing how the exploration/exploitation trade off in biologically-inspired algorithms affects energy consumption},
author = {Merelo Guervos, Juan Julián and Merelo-Molina, Cecilia},
}
```

## Open science

This is open science. A bit of orientation

- [`data`](https://github.com/JJ/brave-new-green-algorithm/tree/main/data) contains the results of the different experiments

## License

(c) Authors, 2025, released under the Affero GPL Please read the [`LICENSE`](LICENSE/)
